Embedded Systems Architectures - Laboratory Guide 2
Familiarization with FreeRTOS
Academic Year 2025/2026
Authors: Arnaldo Oliveira, Fábio Coutinho

1. Objectives
•

Familiarization with FreeRTOS

•

Creation of tasks and manipulation of parameters

•

Communication and synchronization between tasks through Notifications
and Semaphores

2. Introduction to FreeRTOS
A real-time operating system (RTOS) provides a deterministic task scheduler.
Although the task scheduling rules vary by algorithm, tasks created should be
completed within a specified time period. Compared to bare-metal approaches, the
main advantages of using an RTOS are reduced complexity and improved software
architecture, which facilitates maintenance.
The main real-time operating system supported by ESP-IDF is FreeRTOS. ESP-IDF uses
its own version of FreeRTOS ported to RISC-V (or Xtensa, depending on the ESP32
variant). The fundamental difference from the basic FreeRTOS is its support for dual
cores. In ESP-IDF FreeRTOS, if the processor has two cores, the application can
choose which one to assign a task to, or it can let FreeRTOS choose. Other
differences compared to the original FreeRTOS stem mainly from dual-core support.
FreeRTOS is distributed under the MIT license. You can find the ESP-IDF FreeRTOS
documentation at https://www.freertos.org/Documentation/02-Kernel/07-Booksand-manual/01-RTOS_book (it is important to read start reading this book,
specifically chapters 1 – “Preface”, 2 – “The FreeRTOS Kernel Distribution”, 4 – “Task
1

Management”, 6 – “Software Timer Management”, 8 – “Resource Management” and
10 – “Task Notifications”.

2.1 The Kernel
FreeRTOS is a set of C libraries that includes a real-time kernel and modular libraries
implementing complementary functionality. The FreeRTOS kernel is suitable for realtime embedded applications running on microcontrollers or small microprocessors.
These types of applications typically include both hard and soft real-time
requirements. Soft real-time requirements set a deadline, but failure to meet it
would not render the system unusable. For example, responding very slowly to key
presses can make a system seem annoyingly unresponsive, without actually making
it unusable. On the other hand, strict (hard) real-time requirements set a deadline;
failure to meet it would result in the system's complete failure. For example, a
driver's airbag has the potential to cause more harm than good if it responds too
slowly to the collision sensor signals.
The FreeRTOS kernel is a real-time operating system (RTOS) that enables
applications built on FreeRTOS to meet strict real-time requirements. The kernel
allows applications to be organized as a collection of independent execution threads
or tasks. On a processor that has only one core, only a single execution thread can be
executed at a time. The kernel decides which thread to execute by examining the
priority assigned by the application developer. In the simplest case, the designer
could assign higher priorities to threads that implement strict real-time
requirements and lower priorities to threads that implement flexible real-time
requirements. Prioritization in this way would ensure that strict real-time threads are
always executed before flexible threads.

2.2 Why use a real-time operating system?
There are many well-established techniques for writing good embedded software
without using a multithreading kernel. If the system to be developed is simple, these
techniques may provide the most suitable solution. On the other hand, using a

2

kernel will likely be preferable in more complex cases, but where the crossover point
occurs will always be subjective.
Task prioritization can help ensure that an application meets its processing
deadlines, but a kernel can also provide other, less obvious benefits, summarized
below.
•

Time information abstraction - the RTOS is responsible for runtime and provides
a time-related API for the application. This makes the application code structure
more straightforward and reduces overall code size.

•

Maintainability and extensibility - abstraction of timing details results in fewer
interdependencies between modules and allows the software to evolve in a
controlled and predictable way. Furthermore, the kernel handles timing, so the
application's performance is less susceptible to changes in the underlying
hardware.

•

Modularity - tasks are independent modules, each of which should have a welldefined purpose.

•

Team development - tasks should also have well-defined interfaces, allowing for
easier team development.

•

Easier testing - tasks that are well-defined, independent modules with clean
interfaces are easier to test in isolation.

•

Code

reuse

-

code

designed

with

greater

modularity

and

fewer

interdependencies is easier to reuse.
•

Greater efficiency - application code using an RTOS can be fully event-driven.
There is no need to waste processing time polling for events that have not
occurred. The efficiency gains of event-driven design are offset by the need to
process RTOS interrupts and switch execution between tasks. However,
applications that do not use an RTOS typically still include some form of
interrupt.

•

Idle time - the automatically created idle task runs when there are no application
tasks that require processing. The idle task can measure available processing

3

capacity, perform background checks, or put the processor into low-power
mode.
•

Power management - the efficiency gains resulting from using an RTOS allow the
processor to spend more time in low-power mode. Energy consumption can be
significantly reduced by placing the processor in a low-power state each time the
idle task is executed. FreeRTOS also has a special no-tick mode. Using no-tick
mode allows the processor to enter a lower-power mode than it would
otherwise and remain in that mode longer.

•

Flexible interrupt handling - interrupt handlers can be kept very short by
deferring processing to a task created by the application programmer or to the
automatically created RTOS daemon task (also known as a timer task).

•

Mixed processing requirements - simple design patterns can achieve a mix of
periodic, continuous, and event-driven processing within an application.
Furthermore, both strict and flexible real-time requirements can be met by
selecting the appropriate priorities for tasks and interrupts.

3. Fundamental Aspects
FreeRTOS can be compiled with approximately twenty compilers and run on more
than forty processor architectures. Each supported combination of compiler and
processor corresponds to a FreeRTOS port.

3.1 Data Types
Each FreeRTOS port has a unique portmacro.h header file that contains (among
other things) settings for two port-specific data types: TickType_t and
BaseType_t.
3.1.1 TickType_t

FreeRTOS configures a periodic interrupt called a tick interrupt. The number of tick
interrupts since the FreeRTOS application initialization is called the tick count. This
count is used as a measure of time. The time between two tick interrupts is called
the tick period, and times are typically specified as multiples of tick periods.
4

TickType_t is the data type used to store the tick count value and to specify
times. TickType_t can be a 16-bit unsigned type, a 32-bit unsigned type, or a 64bit unsigned type, depending on the configTICK_TYPE_WIDTH_IN_BITS
setting in the FreeRTOSConfig.h file.
3.1.2 BaseType_t

It is always defined as the most efficient data type for the architecture. Typically, it is
a 64-bit type in a 64-bit architecture, a 32-bit type in a 32-bit architecture, a 16-bit
type in a 16-bit architecture, and an 8-bit type in an 8-bit architecture.
BaseType_t is generally used for return types that accept only a very limited
range of values and for booleans of type pdTRUE/pdFALSE.

3.2 Programming Style
Adopting a programming style fosters more readable, consistent code, facilitates
portability across family variants, reduces errors in concurrent tasks, and makes the
development of embedded applications more robust and scalable.
3.2.1 Variable Names

Variables are prefixed with their type: 'c' for char, 's' for int16_t (short), 'l'
for int32_t (long), and 'x' for BaseType_t and any other non-standard types
(structures, task identifiers, queue identifiers, etc.).
If a variable is unsigned, it will also have the prefix 'u'. If a variable is a pointer, it will
also have the prefix 'p'. For example, a variable of type uint8_t will have the
prefix 'uc' and a variable of type pointer to char (char *) will have the prefix 'pc'.
3.2.2 Function Names

Functions are prefixed with the type they return and the file in which they are
defined. For example:
• vTaskPrioritySet() returns a void and is defined in tasks.c.

5

• xQueueReceive() returns a variable of type BaseType_t and is defined in
queue.c.
• pvTimerGetTimerID() returns a pointer to void and is defined in timers.c.
File-scoped (private) functions are prefixed with ‘prv’.
3.2.3 Macros

Most macros are written in uppercase and preceded by lowercase letters indicating
where the macro is defined. For more detailed information, you can consult the
book “Mastering the FreeRTOS Real Time Kernel” or the “FreeRTOS Reference
Manual”, available online.
Prefix

Location of macro definition

port (for example, portMAX_DELAY)

portable.h or portmacro.h

task (for example, taskENTER_CRITICAL())

task.h

pd (for example, pdTRUE)

projdefs.h

config (for example, configUSE_PREEMPTION)

FreeRTOSConfig.h

err (for example, errQUEUE_FULL)

projdefs.h

4. Practical Work
The practical work in this class is developed based on the book “Mastering the
FreeRTOS Real Time Kernel”, specifically chapters 4 – “Task Management”, 8 –
“Resource Management” and 10 – “Task Notifications”. It is recommended to have
the PDF version of the book for reference throughout the lesson plan.

4.1 Task Management
FreeRTOS tasks are the backbone of FreeRTOS. You can think of each task as an
individual application running within your application as a whole. This makes it very
easy to control what is happening in your application and segregate the
functionality, so that individual tasks are responsible for specific sections of your

6

application. FreeRTOS schedules tasks so that one or more can run simultaneously,
depending on the number of available processor cores.
In this section, we will examine FreeRTOS tasks and how they help us structure our
code to make modular programs easier to write.
Next, the “skeleton” of a program containing two functions is provided. Task 1 does
something like simulate reading temperatures and task 2 simulates reading
humidity, both in an infinite while loop. In this example, you want to read the
temperature every second and, at the same time, read the humidity every two
seconds.
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include "freertos/FreeRTOS.h"
#include "freertos/task.h"
void Task1()
{
while (true)
{
printf("reading temperature \n");
vTaskDelay(1000 / portTICK_PERIOD_MS);
}
}
void Task2()
{
while (true)
{
printf("reading humidity \n");
vTaskDelay(2000 / portTICK_PERIOD_MS);
}
}
void app_main(void)
{
Task1();
Task2();
}

Continuing with the compilation and execution of this code, you will verify that the
humidity reading is never called.

7

Question 1: Why is the humidity reading never invoked?
FreeRTOS was designed so that when vTaskDelay is called and the task is waiting,
FreeRTOS looks for other active tasks or tasks that need to be triggered and executes
them as well.
Question 2: Study chapter 4, specifically the task creation functions, and modify the
provided program so that the tasks are executed as expected.
Explore the different task creation options available in FreeRTOS.
Question 3: Consider that you want to identify the task being executed by passing
this information as an input argument when creating the thread. Modify the
program so that you obtain a result similar to the following:
~$ reading temperature from Task1
~$ reading temperature from Task1
~$ reading humidity from Task2
~$ reading temperature from Task1
~$ reading temperature from Task1

Question 4: Considering the previous example, create additional tasks and
experiment with different periods and priorities. Can you find a scenario where one
of the tasks is always blocked?
Question 5: The xTaskCreatePinnedToCore function allows you to select the
core on which a task can be executed. Considering an ESP32-C6 target, what is the
advantage over the xTaskCreate function?

4.2 Task Communication and Synchronization
Besides the modularity enabled by tasks, they often need to communicate and
synchronize to coordinate their execution and safely access shared resources. For
such purposes, two types of primitives are provided in FreeRTOS: Task Notifications
and Semaphores, which will be addressed in the following sections.

8

4.2.1 Task Notifications

In this section, we will look at task notifications. They are one of the simplest ways to
have a task send a notification to another task, called the recipient. Task
notifications require a handler for the created tasks. In this case, we will create a
handler in the recipient that the sender can use to notify.
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include "freertos/FreeRTOS.h"
#include "freertos/task.h"
static TaskHandle_t receiverHandler = NULL;
void Sender(void* params)
{
while (true)
{
xTaskNotifyGive(receiverHandler);
vTaskDelay(5000 / portTICK_PERIOD_MS);
}
}
void Receiver(void* params)
{
while (true)
{
ulTaskNotifyTake(pdTRUE, portMAX_DELAY);
printf("received notification\n");
}
}
void app_main(void)
{
xTaskCreate(Receiver, "receiver", 2048,
NULL, 2, &receiverHandler);
xTaskCreate(Sender, "sender", 2048,
NULL, 2, NULL);
}

You should note that the recipient receives a notification every 5 seconds.
Question 6: Study the ulTaskNotifyTake function and explain why it is not
necessary to delay the execution of the receiver's task with a call to the function
vTaskDelay?

9

Question 7: What is the maximum time the ulTaskNotifyTake calling task
should remain in the Blocked status to wait for its notification value?
4.2.2 Semaphores

Semaphores are used to synchronize access to shared resources. This section
addresses the use of semaphores as mutexes to ensure mutual exclusion when
accessing a shared resource (e.g., a variable or data structure, a bus, a peripheral or
a file). The following code block illustrates a process for writing temperature and
humidity values to a shared resource, in this case, a device or a file.
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include "freertos/FreeRTOS.h"
#include "freertos/task.h"
#include "freertos/semphr.h"
void WriteToDevice(char* message)
{
printf(message);
}
void Task1(void* params)
{
while (true)
{
printf("reading temperature \n");
WriteToDevice("temperature is 25C\n");
vTaskDelay(1000 / portTICK_PERIOD_MS);
}
}
void Task2(void* params)
{
while (true)
{
printf(" reading humidity\n");
WriteToDevice(" humidity is 50\n");
vTaskDelay(2000 / portTICK_PERIOD_MS);
}
}
void app_main(void)
{
xTaskCreate(Task1, "temperature reading", 2048, NULL, 2, NULL);
xTaskCreate(Task2, "humidity reading", 2048, NULL, 2, NULL);
}

10

Question 8: Analyze the code and explain why this code presents a problem.
Question 9: Starting from the provided code and considering the functions
xSemaphoreCreateMutex, xSemaphoreTake, and xSemaphoreGive,
construct a program that solves the problem identified in question 10 and, in case of
an error in writing the humidity or temperature to the bus, displays the message
“writing humidity timed out” / “writing temperature timed out”, respectively.

11

